So, this course is called design and analysis
of algorithms. So, design is something that
is easier to understand. We have a problem,
we want to find an algorithm, so we are trying
to design an algorithm. But what exactly does
analysis mean?
So, analysis means trying to estimate how
efficient an algorithm is. Now, there are
two fundamental parameters that are associated
with this. One is time, how long does the
algorithm actually take to execute on a given
piece of hardware. Remember an algorithm will
be executed as a program, so we will have
to write it in some programming language and
then run it on some particular machine. And
when it runs, we have all sorts of intermediate
variables that we need to keep track of in
order to compute the answer. So, how much
space does it take? How much memory does it
require?
Now, we will argue that, in this course at
least, we will focus on time rather than space.
One reason for this is, time is a rather more
limiting parameter in terms of the hardware.
It is not easy to take a computer and change
its speed. So, if we are running algorithms
on a particular platform, then we are more
or less stuck with the performance that that
platform can give us in term of speed.
Memory, on the other hand, is something, which
is relatively more flexible. We can add a
memory card and increase the memory. And so
in a sense, space is a more flexible requirement
and so we can think about it that way. But
essentially, for this course we will be focusing
on time more than space.
So, if you are looking at time, we have to
ask how we measure the running time. So, of
course, we could run a program on a given
computer and report the answer in seconds
or in milliseconds, but the problem with this
is that the running time of an algorithm measured
in terms of a particular piece of hardware
will, of course, not be a robust measure.
We run it on a different computer or we use
a different programming language, we might
find, that the same algorithm takes different
amount of time. More importantly, if we are
trying to compare two different algorithms,
then if we run one algorithm on one computer,
run the other on another computer, we might
get a misleading comparison. So, instead of
looking at the concrete running time in terms
of some units of time, it is better to do
it in terms of the some abstracts units of
how many steps the algorithm takes. So, this
means, that we have to decide what a notion
of a step is. A step is some kind of a basic
operation, a simple one step operation, that
our algorithm performs and the notion of a
step, of course, depends on what kind of language
we are using.
If we are looking at a very low-level, at
an assembly language kind of thing, then the
steps involves moving data from the main memory
to register, moving it back, doing some arithmetic
operation within the CPU and so on. But typically,
we look at algorithms and we design them and
we implement them at a higher level. We use
programming languages such as C, C plus plus
or Java where we have variables, we assign
values to variables, we compute expressions
and so on. So, for the most part we will look
at basic operations as what we would consider
single statement or steps in a high-level
language. So, this could be an operation such
as assigning a value of X equal to Y plus
1 or doing a comparison, if A less than B,
then do. So, checking whether A is less than
B is one step for us.
Now, we could look at slightly more elaborate
notions of steps. For example, we might assume,
that we have a primitive operation to actually
exchange the values in two variables though
we know, that to implement is we actually
have to go via a third temporary variable.
What we will see is, that we will come up
with a notion, which is robust so that the
actual notion of the basic operation is not
so relevant because we will be able to scale
it up and down according to what notion we
choose to focus.
The other important thing to realize, of course
is, that the algorithm will take a different
amount of time depending on the size of the
problem that it is presented with. It is quite
natural and obvious, that if we are trying
to sort an array, it will take longer to sort
a large array than it will take to sort a
short array. So, we would like to represent
the efficiency of an algorithm as a function
of its input size.
So, if the input is of some size n, then it
will take time t of n where t will be function
depending on the input n, where even this
is not immediately an obvious definition because
not all inputs of size n are going to take
the same amount of time. Some inputs will
take less time, some inputs will take more
time. So, what do we take? So, it will turn
out, that the notion, that we will typically
look at is to look at all the inputs of size
n and look at the worst possible one that
takes the longest time, right. So, this is
called a worst case estimate, it is a pessimistic
estimate, but we will justify it as we go
along. But this is what we mean.
Now, when we are looking at the time efficiency
of an algorithm what we mean is, what is the
worst possible time it will take on inputs
of size n and express this as a function of
n? So, before we formalize this, let us just
look at a couple of examples and get a feel
for what efficiency means in terms of practical
running time on the kinds of computers that
we have available to us.
So, let us start with sorting, which is a
very basic step in many algorithms. So, we
have an array with n elements and we would
like to arrange these elements, say in ascending
or descending order, for further processing.
Now, a na•ve sorting algorithm would compare
every pair of elements more or less and try
to determine how to reorder them. This would
take time proportional to n square because
we are comparing all pairs of elements. On
the other hand, we will see soon in this course,
that there are much cleverer sorting algorithms,
which work in time proportional to n log n.
So, we can go from a naive algorithm which
takes time n square to a better algorithm,
which takes time n log n.
So, what we have really done is, we have taken
a factor of n and replaced it by factor of
log n. So, this seems a relatively minor change.
So, can we see what the effect of this change
is? So, one way to look at this is to actually
look at concrete running times. We said, that
we will not look at running times as measuring
the efficiency of the algorithm, but of course,
the efficiency of the algorithm does have
an impact on how long the program will take
to execute, and therefore on how usable the
program is from our practical perspective.
So, if you take a typical CPU that we find
on a desktop or a laptop, which we have these
days, it can process up to about 10 to the
8 operations. These are the basic operations
in a high-level languages like an assignment
or checking whether one value is less than
another value, right. We can say, that it
takes about, it can do about 10 to the 8 operations.
Now, this is an approximate number, but it
is a way, we need to get some handle on numbers
so that we can do some quantitative comparisons
of these algorithms. So, it is a useful number
to have for approximate calculations.
Now, one thing to remember is that this number
is not changing now a days. We used to have
a situation where CPUs were speeding up every
one and a half year, but now we have kind
of reached the physical limits of current
technology. So, CPUs are not speeding up.
We are using different types of technologies
to get around this, parallelizing, multicore
and so on. But essentially, the sequential
speed of a CPU is stuck at about 10 to the
8 operations per second.
So, now when we take a small input, supposing
we are just trying to rearrange our contact
list on our mobile phone. We might have a
few hundred contacts, maybe a thousand contacts,
maybe even a few thousand contacts. If you
try to sort a contact list, say by name, it
really would not make much difference to us
whether we use n square or n log n algorithm.
Both of them will work in a fraction of second
and before we know it, we will have the answer.
But if we go to more non-trivial sizes, then
the difference becomes rather stark.
So, consider the problem of compiling a sorted
list of all the mobile subscribers across
the country. It so turns out that India has
about one billion, that is, 10 to the 9 mobile
subscribers. This includes data cards, phones,
various things, but these are all people who
are all registered with some telecom operator
and own a sim card. So, this is the number
of sim cards, which are in active use in India
today. So, suppose we want to compile a list
of all owners of sim cards in India in some
sorted fashion.
Since we have 10 to the 9 subscribers, if
we run an n square algorithm, this will take
10 to the 18 operations because 10 to the
9 square is 10 to the 18. Now, 10 to the 18
operations per seconds, since we can do only
10 to the 8 operations in 1 second, will take
10 to the 10 seconds. So, how much is 10 to
the 10 seconds? Well, it is about 2.8 million
hours; it is about 115 thousand days, that
is, about 300 years. So, you can imagine,
that if we really want to do this using an
n squared algorithm, it would really not be
practical because it would take more than
our lifetime, more than several generations
in fact, to compute this on the current hardware.
On the other hand, if we were to move to the
smarter n log n algorithm, which we claim
we will find, then it turns out, that sorting
this large number of own users takes only
3 times 10 to the 10 because the log to the
base 2 of 10 to the 9 is 30. It is useful
to remember, that 2 to the 10 is 1000. So,
log to the base 2 of 1000 is 10. Now, since
logs add 1000 times, 1000 is 10 to the 6,
right, so the log of 10 to the 6 is 20, log
of 10 to the 9 is 30. So, 30 into 10 to the
9 n log n is 3 times 10 to the 10. So, this
means, that it will take about 300 seconds.
So, it will take about 5 minutes.
Now, 5 minutes is not a short time, you can
go and have a tea and come back, but still
it will get done in a reasonably short amount
of time, so that we can then work with this
useful information and go on as opposed to
300 years, which is totally impractical.
So, let us look at another example. So, supposing
we are playing a video game, right. So, this
might be one of these action type games where
there are objects moving around the screen
and we have to know, identify certain object,
shoot them down, capture them and whatever.
So, let us assume that as part of the game
in order to compute the score, it has to periodically
find out the closest pair of objects on the
screen.
So, now, how do you find the closest pair
of objects among group of objects? Well, of
course, you can take every pair of them, find
the distance between each pair and then take
the smallest one, right. So, this will been
an n squared algorithm, right. So, you compute
the distance between any two objects and then
after doing this for every pair you take the
smallest value. Now, it turns out, that there
is a clever algorithm, again, which takes
time n log n. So, what is this distinction
between n square and n log n in this context?
Now, on a modern kind of gaming computer with
a large display it is not unreasonable to
assume, that we could have a resolution of
say, 2500 by 1500 pixels. If we have one of
these reasonable size 20 inch monitors, we
could easily get this kind of resolution.
So, we will have about 3.75 millions points
on the screen. Now, we have some objects placed
at some of these points.
So, let us assume that we have five lakh objects,
five hundred thousand objects placed on the
screen. So, if you were to now compute the
pair of objects among these five hundred thousand,
which are closest to each other and we use
the na•ve n squared algorithm, then you
would expect to take 25 times 10 into the
10 steps because that is 5 into 10 to the
5 whole square. 25 into 10 to the 10 is 2500
seconds, which is around 40 minutes.
Now, if you are playing a game, an action
game in which reflexes determine your score,
obviously, each update cannot take 40 minutes.
That would not be an effective game. On the
other hand, you can easily check, that if
you do n log n calculation for 5 into 10 to
the 5, you will take something like 10 to
the 6 or 10 to the 7 seconds. So, this will
be a fraction of second, 1-10th or 1-100th
of a second, which is well below your human
response time. So, it will be, essentially,
instantaneous. So, we move from a game, which
is hopelessly slow to one in which it can
really test your reflexes as a human.
So, we have seen in these two examples, that
there is a real huge practical gulf between
even something as close to each other as n
log n and n squared. The size of the problems,
that we can tackle for n squared are much
smaller than the size of the problems we can
tackle for n log n. So, when we look at these
functions of n, typically we will ignore constants.
Now, this will partly be justified later on
by the fact, that we are not fixing the basic
operation, but essentially by ignoring constants
we are looking at the overall function of...
the efficiency as a function of n, in the,
as it increases, right. So, this is what we
call asymptotic complexity, as n gets large
how does the function behave.
So, for instance, supposing we have some function,
which grows like n squared with a large coefficient
and something, which goes like n cube with
a coefficient of 1, initially it will look
like n squared, say 5000 n squared is much
more than n cube, but very rapidly, say at
5000, right. At 5000 we will have, both will
be 5000 cube and beyond 5000 the function
n cube will grow faster than function 5000
n squared, right.
So, there will be a point beyond which n cube
will overtake n square and after that it will
rapidly pull away. So, this is what we would
typically like to measure. We would like to
look at the functions as functions of n without
looking at the individual constants and we
will look at this little more in detail.
So, since we are only interested in orders
of magnitude, we can broadly classify functions
in terms of what kind of functions they look
like, right. So, we could have functions,
which are proportional to log n; functions,
which are proportional to n, n squared, n
cube, n to the k; which is, so any n to a
fixed k is a polynomial. So, we can call these,
all these functions, we will look at, as polynomial,
right. So, these are polynomial. And then
we could have something, which is 2 to the
n. 2 to the n essentially, comprises of looking
at all possible subsets. So, these are typically
the brute force algorithms where we look at
every possibility and then determine the answer,
right. So, we have logarithmic polynomial
and exponential functions. So, what do these
look like in terms of the numbers that we
were talking about.
So, if you look at this chart, the left column
varies the input size from 10 to the 1 to
10 to the 10 and then each column after that
is a different type of complexity behaviour
as a function, which ignores constants and
only looks at the magnitude. So, we have log
n and then we have something, which is polynomial
n, n square, n cube. In between we have n
log n we saw before and then we have these
two exponential functions, which are 2 to
the n and n factorial, right. So, now, in
this we are trying to determine how efficiency
determines practical useability.
So, now, if you look at this, we said, that
we can do 10 to the 8 operations in 1 second.
So, maybe we are willing to work up to 10
seconds. So, 10 to the 9 operation is about
the limit of what we would consider efficient.
10 to the 10 operation would mean 100 second,
which would mean 2 minutes and may be 2 minutes
is too long.
So, now clearly, if we are looking in the
logarithmic scale, there is no problem. Up
to 10 to the 10, right, we can do everything
in about 33 steps, which will take very, very
little time. Now, in a linear scale given,
that we are expecting 10 to the 9 as our limit,
this becomes our limit, right. So, we can
draw a line here and say, that below this
red line things are impossibly slow. n log
n is only slightly worse than n. So, we can
do inputs of size 10 to the 8 because n log
n of 10 to the 8 is something proportional
to 10 to the 9.
Now, there is this huge gulf that we saw.
If we move from n log n to n squared, then
the feasibility limit is somewhere between
10 to the 4 and 10 to the 5 because, for 10
to the 5, we already reach time.. running
time of 10 to the 10, which is beyond what
we want and now if we move to n cube then
the feasibility limit drops further. So, we
cannot go beyond an input size of 1000 right.
So, we can see that there is a drastic drop
and when we come to exponentials really beyond
some trivial things of the size 10 or 20,
we cannot really do anything, anything, which
is even a 100 will be impossibly slow, right.
So, we have these kind of, this sharp dividing
line of feasibility right. And so we can see
that it is important to get efficient algorithm
because if we have inefficient algorithms,
even if we think that they work correctly,
we will not be able to solve problems of any
reasonable size right. When we are looking
at computational algorithms running on a PC,
you would really expect our input sizes to
be 100s, 1000s and much more right. So, when
we are sorting things, we really do expect
large volumes of data, if you want to you
look at voters list, population data or data
coming out of say a biology experiment about
genetic material, now these things are typically
very large volumes of data, so it is really
important to get the best possible algorithm
to do these things otherwise the problem at
hand will not be effectively solved.